New tutorial: 19_multimodal_retrieval (#52)
deepset-ai/haystack-tutorials: markdowns/19_Text_to_Image_search_pipeline_with_MultiModal_Retriever.md

---
layout: tutorial
colab: https://colab.research.google.com/github/deepset-ai/haystack-tutorials/blob/main/tutorials/19_Text_to_Image_search_pipeline_with_MultiModal_Retriever.ipynb
toc: True
title: "Text-to-Image search pipeline with MultiModal Retriever"
last_updated: 2022-11-01
level: "intermediate"
weight: 95
description: Use a MultiModalRetriever to build a cross modal search pipeline.
category: "QA"
aliases: ['/tutorials/multimodal']
---
    

**Level**: Intermediate

**Time to complete**: 20 minutes

**Prerequisites**: Prepare the Colab environment (see links below).

**Nodes Used**: InMemoryDocumentStore, MultiModalRetriever

> **Goal**: After completing this tutorial, you will have learned about the MultiModalRetriever, and built a simple retrieval pipeline that search relevant images given a text query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Goal**: After completing this tutorial, you will have learned about the MultiModalRetriever, and built a simple retrieval pipeline that searches for relevant images given a text query.
```

Author: Done.

> 

Reviewer: Tutorial 1, there is a paragraph underneath the intro table that describes what happens in the tutorial. I think this would be a good place to explain a little bit more about the process of mixed modality search. More specifically, some mention of the fact that:
- an image is embedded by a transformer model
- the embedding is representative of this image's contents
- the query is embedded by the same model and the embedding exists in the same vector space
- we perform nearest neighbours search link in text to text retrieval

Author: I added the description, can you maybe read it and let me know your thoughts?

## Preparing the Colab Environment

- [Enable GPU Runtime in GPU](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/v5.2-unstable/docs/enable-gpu-runtime-in-colab)
- [Check if GPU is Enabled](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/v5.2-unstable/docs/check-if-gpu-is-enabled)
- [Set logging level to INFO](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/v5.2-unstable/docs/set-the-logging-level)

```bash
%%bash

pip install --upgrade pip
pip install farm-haystack[colab]
```

> ```python

Reviewer: Do you make reference to the console output in this tutorial? Otherwise I would argue that we remove this block since it is not essential and is covered by the link under "Preparing the Colab Environment"

Author: I agree. Removed.

import logging

logging.basicConfig(format="%(levelname)s - %(name)s -  %(message)s", level=logging.WARNING)
logging.getLogger("haystack").setLevel(level=logging.INFO)
```

# Initializing the DocumentStore

A DocumentStore contains Documents, which in this case are references to the images that Haystack will compare with your query. Here we are using the InMemoryDocumentStore since it requires no external dependencies. To learn more about the DocumentStore and the different types of external databases that we support, see [DocumentStore](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/document_store).

```python
from haystack.document_stores import InMemoryDocumentStore

> document_store = InMemoryDocumentStore(embedding_dim=512)

Reviewer: Probably worth mentioning that it is 512 because of the output dims of the model we will be using

Author: Added comment.

```

> # Downloading data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Downloading Data
```

Let's capitalize titles

Author: Done :)

> Download 18 sample images of different animals from . You can find them in data/tutorial19/spirit-animals/ as a set of .jpg files.

Reviewer: Are there any limitations when it comes to the dimensions of the image?

Author: Superb question. Took me quite some time to find out this.

As such, there aren't any limitations when it comes to the image's dimensions, but the image always gets resized to 224x224 if it's of bigger dims.

Ref: It happens inside resize function. https://huggingface.co/transformers/v4.8.0/_modules/transformers/models/clip/feature_extraction_clip.html#CLIPFeatureExtractor

Author: Also there's a limitation on the max_seq_len (for embedding text with the CLIP model) which is 76 BPE tokens.

```python
from haystack.utils import fetch_archive_from_http

doc_dir = "data/tutorial19"

fetch_archive_from_http(
    url="https://s3.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/deepset.ai-farm-qa/datasets/documents/spirit-animals.zip",
    output_dir=doc_dir
)
```

Add the images you just downloaded into Haystack Document objects and write them into the DocumentStore.

```python
import os

from haystack import Document

images = [
    Document(content=f"./{doc_dir}/spirit-animals/{filename}", content_type="image")
    for filename in os.listdir(f"./{doc_dir}/spirit-animals/")
]

document_store.write_documents(images)
```

# Initializing the Retriever

> Retrievers sift through all the images and return only those that are relevant based on the input query. Here we are using the OpenAI CLIP model to embed images. For more details on supported modalities, see [MultiModalRetriever](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/retriever#multimodal-retrieval).

Reviewer: Is there model card for the OpenAI CLIP model? Would be good to link it here if so

Author: Added.

```python
from haystack.nodes.retriever.multimodal import MultiModalRetriever

retriever_text_to_image = MultiModalRetriever(
    document_store=document_store,
    query_embedding_model = "sentence-transformers/clip-ViT-B-32",
    query_type="text",

>     document_embedding_models = {"image": "sentence-transformers/clip-ViT-B-32"} #, "text": "sentence-transformers/clip-ViT-B-32"},

Reviewer: The inline comment is a bit confusing and I would rather drop it. I see now that its an alternative setting, but if a user is to substitute it in, they will be performing text to text retrieval, which I don't think is somethign we would generally recommend with the MultiModalRetriever

Author: Removed.

)

document_store.update_embeddings(retriever=retriever_text_to_image)
```

# Creating the MultiModal search Pipeline

> We use a generic Pipeline that uses MultiModalRetriever as node and creates a search pipeline. This search pipeline allows us to query the image database with text queries and returns most relevant images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are populating a Pipeline with a MultiModalRetriever node. This search pipeline queries the image database with text and returns the most relevant images.
```

Author: Done

```python
from haystack import Pipeline

pipeline = Pipeline()
pipeline.add_node(component=retriever_text_to_image, name="retriever_text_to_image", 

>                   inputs=["Query"])

Reviewer: Let's be more consistent here with argument formatting here. Either all on one line, else a new line for each argument with indentation like this 
```
pipeline.add_node(
    component=retriever_text_to_image,
    name="retriever_text_to_image", 
    inputs=["Query"]
)
```

Author: Done

```

> # Searching through the images

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Searching Through the Images
```

Author: Done

> Use the pipeline `run()` method to query the images in the document store. The query argument is where you type your text query. Additionally, you can set the number of images you want the MultiModalRetriever to return using the `top-k` parameter. To learn more about setting arguments, see [Pipeline Arguments](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/pipelines#arguments).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the pipeline `run()` method to query the images in the DocumentStore. The query argument is where you type your text query. Additionally, you can set the number of images you want the MultiModalRetriever to return using the `top-k` parameter. To learn more about setting arguments, see [Pipeline Arguments](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/pipelines#arguments).
```

Author: Done.

```python

> results = pipeline.run(query="Animal who lives in the water",

Reviewer: ```
results = pipeline.run(
    query="Animal who lives in the water",
    params={"retriever_text_to_image": {"top_k": 3}}
)
```

---
layout: tutorial
colab: https://colab.research.google.com/github/deepset-ai/haystack-tutorials/blob/main/tutorials/19_Text_to_Image_search_pipeline_with_MultiModal_Retriever.ipynb
toc: True

> title: "Text-to-Image search pipeline with MultiModal Retriever"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Text-To-Image Search Pipeline with Multimodal Retriever"
```

Author: Changed :)

last_updated: 2022-11-03
level: "intermediate"
weight: 95
description: Use a MultiModalRetriever to build a cross modal search pipeline.
category: "QA"
aliases: ['/tutorials/multimodal']
---
    

**Level**: Intermediate

**Time to complete**: 20 minutes

> **Prerequisites**: Prepare the Colab environment (see links below).

Reviewer 2: Since this is an intermediate-level tutorial, I suppose we also assume that the users already know some things like have a basic knowledge (or more than basic?) of NLP concepts. Do we need them to know anything else? basic knowledge of haystack? Anything else?

Reviewer 2: I think having an installed instance of Haystack is a prerequisite as well

Author: @agnieszka-m I took it from Branden's [tutorial restructuring PR](https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack-tutorials/pull/44/files#diff-dbe1a3c4d5cf3e90c8061c064829f918faf140fe28e11f6391d113e74c15aae7R14), assuming it to be a prerequisite for running the notebook and not as the prerequisite knowledge required for following the tutorial.

If you think users will be confused then I can add "Basic knowledge of Haystack (see Tutorial 1, 2)". 
Please let me know what you think

Reviewer 2: I added the same comments to Branden's tutorials :) 
Yes, I think I'd add something like: This tutorial assumes basic knowledge of Haystack <a>Retrievers</a> and <a>Pipelines</a>. If you want to learn about them, have a look at "Title of Tutorial 1" and "Title of tutorial 2". " (of course the tutorial titles are links.)

Author: Added :)

**Nodes Used**: InMemoryDocumentStore, MultiModalRetriever

> **Goal**: After completing this tutorial, you will have learned about the MultiModalRetriever, and built a simple retrieval pipeline that searches for relevant images given a text query.

Reviewer 2: How about simplifying it a bit: 
After completing this tutorial, you will have built a search system that retrieves images as answers to a text query.

Author: Changed.

> To make this pipeline work, we first need to embed the images from the dataset using a transformer model. These image embeddings are representative of the respective image's content. These embeddings lie in a high-dimensional vector space. Then we embed the text query using the same transformer model (i.e. OpenAI CLIP). Because we use the same transformer model, these text embeddings also exist in the same space as the image embeddings. Finally, we perform a nearest neighbor search to retrieve relevant images for our text query.

Reviewer 2: To me, this belongs to the tutorial description. It's not really a goal. 

If we move this to the description, this needs a bit of rephrasing (and I'd simplify it a bit too):
In this tutorial, you'll download a set of images that you'll then turn into embeddings using a transformers model, OpenAI CLIP. You'll then use the same model to embed the text query. Finally, you'll perform a nearest neighbor search to retrieve the images relevant to the text query.

I woulnd't mention the high-dimentional space, etc. as I don't think it's crucial to understand/complete the tutorial and it may be confusing at this point.

Reviewer 2: btw. I added the same comments to Branden's tutorials :) I think we should align all of them to give the user a consistent experience so that they know what to expect.

Author: Changed :)

> Let's go and build a Text-to-Image search pipeline using a small animal dataset!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's build a text-to-image search pipeline using a small animal dataset!
```

Author: fixed

## Preparing the Colab Environment

- [Enable GPU Runtime in GPU](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/v5.2-unstable/docs/enable-gpu-runtime-in-colab)
- [Check if GPU is Enabled](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/v5.2-unstable/docs/check-if-gpu-is-enabled)
- [Set logging level to INFO](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/v5.2-unstable/docs/set-the-logging-level)

> 

Author: Added

```bash
%%bash

pip install --upgrade pip
pip install farm-haystack[colab]
```

# Initializing the DocumentStore

> A DocumentStore contains Documents, which in this case are references to the images that Haystack will compare with your query. Here we are using the InMemoryDocumentStore since it requires no external dependencies. To learn more about the DocumentStore and the different types of external databases that we support, see [DocumentStore](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/document_store).

Reviewer 2: How about simplifying it a bit (have a look at [Voice and Tone](https://www.notion.so/deepsetai/Voice-and-Tone-Style-Guide-47952298c3f443e6973ae285ac89fb0a), we aim to reduce anxiety and time to value):

A DocumentStore stores references to the images that Haystack will compare with your query. But before it can do that, you need to initialize it. In this tutorial, you'll use the InMemoryDocumentStore. 
If you want to learn more, see [DocumentStore](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/document_store).

(I'd say it's enough information for this tutorial, at this point they don't need to know what else a document store can store but I'm open to discuss this if you disagree :))

Author: I absolutely agree :)

```python
from haystack.document_stores import InMemoryDocumentStore

> # Here we initialize the DocumentStore with 512 dims 

Reviewer: This feels a little tautological. Maybe better to mention that the output of the embedding model is 512 dims

Author: Changed.

# as we will use it to store 512 dim image embeddings 
document_store = InMemoryDocumentStore(embedding_dim=512)
```

# Downloading Data

> Download 18 sample images of different animals from . You can find them in data/tutorial19/spirit-animals/ as a set of .jpg files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Download 18 sample .jpg images of different animals from data/tutorial19/spirit-animals/:
```

```python
from haystack.utils import fetch_archive_from_http

doc_dir = "data/tutorial19"

fetch_archive_from_http(
    url="https://s3.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/deepset.ai-farm-qa/datasets/documents/spirit-animals.zip",
    output_dir=doc_dir
)
```

Add the images you just downloaded into Haystack Document objects and write them into the DocumentStore.

```python
import os

from haystack import Document

images = [
    Document(content=f"./{doc_dir}/spirit-animals/{filename}", content_type="image")
    for filename in os.listdir(f"./{doc_dir}/spirit-animals/")
]

document_store.write_documents(images)

> ```

Reviewer 2: Here I'd add something that would sum up what we've done in this step:
You have turned your images into embeddings and stored them in the DocumentStore. You then initialzed the DocumentStore so that it's ready for search.

(or something like that)

Author: Here we are actually only adding the images to the document stores.

Turning them into embeddings and storing the embeddings in the doc store happens in the next step.

Ok, maybe this process is a bit confusing for first-time users, but experienced users will know that. Also, it's good that we are asking users first to go and do Tut 1 & 2 before jumping into this one so that they'll have an easier time with it.

I get your point tho, so I am going to change the text of the next block.

# Initializing the Retriever

> Retrievers sift through all the images and return only those that are relevant based on the input query. Here we are using the [OpenAI CLIP model](https://github.com/openai/CLIP/blob/main/model-card.md) to embed images. For more details on supported modalities, see [MultiModalRetriever](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/retriever#multimodal-retrieval).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Retrievers sift through all the images and return only those that are relevant to the query. To run a search on images, you'll use the MultiModalRetriever with the [OpenAI CLIP model](https://github.com/openai/CLIP/blob/main/model-card.md). 
For more details on supported modalities, see [MultiModalRetriever](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/retriever#multimodal-retrieval).
```

Author: Done

> 

Reviewer 2: How about an additional sentence here, like: Before adding the Retriever to your pipeline, configure its parameters:

Author: Added

```python
from haystack.nodes.retriever.multimodal import MultiModalRetriever

retriever_text_to_image = MultiModalRetriever(
    document_store=document_store,
    query_embedding_model = "sentence-transformers/clip-ViT-B-32",
    query_type="text",
    document_embedding_models = {"image": "sentence-transformers/clip-ViT-B-32"}
)

> 

Reviewer 2: I'd add a comment here explaining what this does or why we need this here

Author: Added

document_store.update_embeddings(retriever=retriever_text_to_image)

> ```

Reviewer 2: Here again, I'd sum up the step: Your retriever is now ready for search.

Author: Added

> # Creating the MultiModal search Pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Creating the MultiModal Search Pipeline
```

Author: Fixed

> # Creating the MultiModal search Pipeline

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Creating the MultiModal Search Pipeline
```

> We are populating a Pipeline with a MultiModalRetriever node. This search pipeline queries the image database with text and returns the most relevant images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are populating a pipeline with a MultiModalRetriever node. This search pipeline queries the image database with text and returns the most relevant images.
```

Author: Fixed

> We are populating a Pipeline with a MultiModalRetriever node. This search pipeline queries the image database with text and returns the most relevant images.

Reviewer 2: I think we've already said that before. Here, I'd say something like: Time to create the pipeline for our search! Define the pipeline components:

```python
from haystack import Pipeline

pipeline = Pipeline()
pipeline.add_node(
    component=retriever_text_to_image, 
    name="retriever_text_to_image", 
    inputs=["Query"]
)

> ```

Reviewer 2: Again, sum up: Now, you have a pipeline that uses the MultiModalRetriever and takes a text query as input. Let's try it out.

Author: Added

# Searching Through the Images

Use the pipeline `run()` method to query the images in the DocumentStore. The query argument is where you type your text query. Additionally, you can set the number of images you want the MultiModalRetriever to return using the `top-k` parameter. To learn more about setting arguments, see [Pipeline Arguments](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/pipelines#arguments).

```python
results = pipeline.run(

>     query="Animal who lives in the water",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    query="Animal that lives in the water",
```

    params={"retriever_text_to_image": {"top_k": 3}}
)

> results = sorted(results["documents"], key=lambda d: d.score, reverse=True)

Reviewer 2: can we add a comment explaining what it does?

Author: Added. Although I think it's pretty standard python sorting which any Python user should know.

for doc in results:
    print(doc.score, doc.content)
```

> Here are some more query strings you could try out:

Reviewer 2: Should these queries be more natural-language like or is it ok that they're keywords?

Author: It can be either. It should be more like the search queries we use for Googling images.

1.   King of the Jungle
2.   Fastest animal

> 3.   Bird who can see clearly even in the dark

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3.   Bird that can see clearly even in the dark
```

Author: fixed

> You can also vizualize these images with their score easily with below code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also easily vizualize these images together with their score using this code:
```

Author: Changed.

```python
from io import BytesIO
from PIL import Image, ImageDraw, ImageOps
from IPython.display import display, Image as IPImage

def display_img_array(ima, score):
    im = Image.open(ima)
    img_with_border = ImageOps.expand(im ,border=20, fill='white')

    # Add Text to an image
    img = ImageDraw.Draw(img_with_border)
    img.text((20, 0), f"Score: {score},    Path: {ima}", fill=(0, 0, 0))

    bio = BytesIO()
    img_with_border.save(bio, format='png')
    display(IPImage(bio.getvalue(), format='png'))

images_array = [doc.content for doc in results]
scores = [doc.score for doc in results]
for ima, score in zip(images_array, scores):
    display_img_array(ima, score)
```

> 

Reviewer 2: How about adding a result here: Congratulations! You've created a search system that returns images of animals in answer to a text query.

Author: Added

    document_embedding_models = {"image": "sentence-transformers/clip-ViT-B-32"}
)

> # Now let's turns our images into embeddings and store them in the DocumentStore.

Author: Fixed this typo :)
